From Hansel minutes.com. It's Hansel
minutes. Oh, weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one 81 reported
live Thursday, September 24th, 2009. Support for
Hanselman it's just provided by
Tellerik rad controls, the most
comprehensive suite of controls for
windows forms and they asp.net
web applications online@wwwdotteldrik.com. In this
episode, Scott talks about mano
with Joseph Hill and Scott bellwether.
Hi, this is Scott Hanselman
and this is another episode
of Hansel minutes. This is
a mano, a episode of
Hansel minutes, and I've got
two interesting people on today.
We've got Joseph Hill product manager
for mono. Thanks for coming
on Joseph. And we've got
the legendary Scott bellwether, a
internationally known.net and Ruby dandy.
And  how are you?
Scott malware. I'm very good.
Thanks guys. Thanks for helping
me organize this, Scott. I
really appreciate it. You had
a, you've got a conference
coming up, focusing on, on
mano called mano space. Where
can people learn about that
other than on the, the
search engines? Well, the website
is monospace.us and we have
a Twitter feed and a
blog feed as well, where
we're, where we're slowly leaking
from news is as things
go on, I guess most
people are talking about monospace
on the social networks. So
that would probably be the
best place to sort of
keep a, keep an ear
to the ground. And when
is the conference Conferences? October 27th,
which is a Tuesday, October 30th,
Friday, which is the day
before Halloween. Okay. And is
the conference focused entirely on,
on mano? The significant focus?
I would say the majority
of the focus is mano,
but this is really a
conference parts. The first part
is two days of, of
in-depth tutorials or immersive tutorials.
And the second two days
are an open space format
or an open format, much
like the way we did
Kaizen con in Austin last
year. And I think the
Seattle AlterNet conference did a
little bit of the same
thing last spring as well.
The idea is to spend
two days learning new things,
really sort of going deep
on things that you haven't
had a chance to get
exposure to before. And the
following two days, you can
spend time sort of honing
that understanding or drilling that
understanding in by using the
open space format to do
that. But the open space
format also allows for anything.
So I expect the, the
participants who put any subject
they want into the, into
the schedule and that can
most definitely leave the, the,
the subject area of mono.
So I expect that we'll
talk about open source on.net
broadly inclusive of mano and
inclusive, inclusive of MSPL, but
we also have some MSPL
content in the tutorial track
as well. I know that
Glen block more than likely
or possibly, I'm not sure
what the likelihood is at
this point. He's working it
out, we'd come and do
a talk on the managed
extensibility framework. And I think
he might actually even do
that on, on a Linux
distro to show the mano
guys, some of the developments
that are going on from
the Microsoft side in open
source and MSPL that can
benefit and have an effect
on model development. So I'm
hoping that this really this
conference, like the conferences of
the previous two years are
going to be an opportunity
to both learn, learn new
things and to cross pollinate
ideas and make a, you
know, both broader and deeper
knowledge for the betterment of,
of our understanding of software
development and app development and.net
and CLR and mano by
convention. So for people who
aren't familiar and for maybe
for our non native English
speaking listeners, when you're saying
the word you're saying MSPL
is M S P L
Microsoft permissive license, which is
Microsoft a very simple and
fairly liberal open source license.
So when we say MSPL,
we're talking about open source
software from Microsoft, right? So
you're focusing on mano at
the conference, but also on
your anticipating some MSPs and
Microsoft open source topics as
well. Like you said, meth,
the, the managed extensibility framework,
It's a little bit of
a digression into jargon when
I said MSPL, I, I
guess I was referring to
some of the open source
development, some of the open
source frameworks on the, on
the development side and the
dev stack that are built
by Microsoft. So Microsoft extensibility
framework is an MSPL or
yeah, my MSPL product and
AFP MVC is MSPL as
well. It's a, a, a,
a, an official open source
license as per the, the,
what does that body, the
OSI OSI, Yeah. Open source
is that OSI open source
initiative. It's the people that
recognize whether something's really open
source a Joseph. Yeah, that's
right. Let me take it
this direction though. Why would
I care about mono Joseph?
I I'm a dotnet programmer
and I do all my
work in the Microsoft CLR.
Why would I want to,
to go to this conference
and why would I want
to start using mono other
than to try something different
as Scott said, Oh, that's
that opens a whole can
of worms. So the short
version and traditionally is that
we have these dotnet skills
and you don't want them
to be tied exclusively to
Microsoft platforms. So that's one
common, common answer. And I
think we can probably delve
into that pretty deeply. And
you know, some of the
other answers on the cider
that we do a lot
of.net development off of windows.
And a lot of that
in can be extremely relevant
to.net developers. So we've developed
a lot of libraries that
are fully managed that developers
can take advantage of in
windows. And some of those
are being adopted like the
mano dot addins framework we
have, which some overlap with
math that Delaware was mentioning
earlier, but provides some, some
separate functionality as well. We
have, we have our motto
develop IDE, which is visual
studio, like visual studio developers
would be very comfortable in
it, but it actually runs
very well on Linux windows
and Mac. And, you know,
really it's a, you know,
like, like Scott said, it's
a broadening of knowledge. There's,
there's a lot to be
learned from the, from the
cross pollination there, Wouldn't you
say that kind of historically,
and historically of course in
the, in the internet is
maybe the last few months
or the last year or
two, but historically that mano
development hasn't exactly been easy
for the person who lives
inside of visual studio for
the, for the windows visual
studio person that they're gonna
spend a little more time
at the command line, or
a little more time in
an IDE that maybe isn't
visual studio. This is extremely
true. Yeah. This is, I
don't know. It's not exactly
a slam dunk is what
I'm saying. And it's very
exciting and powerful, but from
a tooling perspective, it's not
a, it's not incredibly easy.
Like you said, historical and
internet terms. I mean, when,
when I got into it,
which was, you know, 2003,
it was okay, first download
the model sources. And it's
been a few days figuring
out how to build that
and bootstrap up from there.
And, you know, in the,
in the past year or
two, we've, we've gotten a
lot closer to, I mean,
at least if you go
to the mano website, you
can get a virtual machine
or live CD that, that
has everything pre-configured. So that
in the simplest case, particularly
like if you take an
asp.net website, you could publish
your asp.net website to a
Linux server from directly within
visual studio as is. So
the story has gotten a
lot better, but yeah, I
mean, there's always, there's always
a level of comfort that
people, you know, have to
figure out if they're willing
to come up to now
that said, I think it's
a good segue into, you
know, part of what we've
been focused on doing within
the mano team in the
past year, which is to
really improve the story for
the visual studio developers. And,
you know, we have some
tools for visual studio that,
that are currently in preview
form and will be, you
know, we're opening it up
more and more, we'll be
launching it actually very soon.
Cause they're, they're, they're starting
to become quite complete, but
what we've done there is
created in that, in for
visual studio that tries to
remove that, that last layer
of complexity that you were
referred to so that, you
know, really it is truly
as simple as, okay, build
this, run it in motto,
you know, run it remotely
on a Linux server and
mano, and ultimately be able
to remotely from within visual
studio directly to, to Amano
application running on a, on
a Linux box. And this
is what we're calling colloquium,
mano vs. Is that kind
of the, the code name
we'll call it for now.
Yeah. That's a, you know,
mono vs. If you wanted
to see about it on
Twitter, you'd be looking for
the, you know, hash mono
vs. Hashtag. Okay. So that's,
that's the short form. There
are some, there's still some
debate on the final name,
but it's, you know, MonaVie
S is growing on me.
So it could just be
that, And this plugs into
visual studio as a native
add in as a windows
ad and it's custom to
visual studio. And is it,
is it, is it an
add in that's? What is
it doing? Is it shelling
out? I mean, how does
this thing making mano feel
as convenient as doing regular.net
development? So it is a,
it's a, it's a normal
add in if you've ever
installed an ad in individual
studio, you're probably familiar with
the term. I mean, it's,
you know, you say something's
an ad and it has,
it has a specific connotation.
And that's what this is.
And in fact, you know,
Novell joined the, the visual
studio industry partners program so
that we could really get
hooked into the visual studio
ecosystem. As a, as I've
heard it referenced a few
places, you know, what it
comes down to is, is
making visual studio developers as
comfortable as they can be
in, in their, in their
native environment because visual studio
is an integrated development environment
and, and developers expect an
integrated development experience. And so
that is what it tries
to provide. We, we had
the, we had the menus
to the, the menu bar
and context menus where they
make sense and it tries
to achieve a couple of
goals. I mean, we, we
want to expose the features.
The developers believe they need
directly within visual studio. But
beyond that, we were trying
to hide developers through the
process of getting an application
running on mono. So each
of the features are, are,
you know, you can get
to them where they make
sense, but beyond that, we
we've arranged everything so that
if you didn't know where
to get started before, you'll,
you'll know exactly where to
jump in now. So there's
a list of features and
it starts with the motto
migration analyzer, which, you know,
prior to prior to the
digital studio tools is, has
been a tool that we
host on the website. That's
just a standalone WinForms app
today, but we've integrated, integrated
that in visual studio so
that what you can do
is you can say analyze
my, my application that I'm
developing here, and it will
compare everything you're calling in.net
to everything that's available in
mano and, and give you
warnings just like you would
expect, you know, other warnings
to show up in visual
studio where you can double
click and say, go to
this call. And if you're
calling a method that doesn't
exist in mano yet, then
you'll be able to correct
it right there. Or if
you're dependent on, you know,
native libraries and you're doing
team folks, you'll get warnings
say, Hey, you need to
be aware of this. This
method may not exist under
target platform, so you can
address it. How, how often
does that happen? I mean,
I think that's a real
question that people want to
understand about mano is that,
so you just use the
term P invoke, right. And
this means calling into a
native library. So for example,
I can't call, I can't
be on Linux running a
dotnet application under mono, and
then say, I want to
call into, you know, something
in kernel 30, two dot
DLL, you know, I can't
touch the operating system. And
that's, that's what a virtual
machine is for. But I
think what people, people wonder
if they're thinking about going
to mano they're, I think
they're afraid that they might
start moving in there and
then discover that there's some
whole section or some whole
API that they just don't
have. They don't have access
to it. It doesn't even
exist. What's the surface area
like. Yeah. Well, so that's
the great thing about MoMA.
I mean, the mono migration
analyzer is, is you can
take that and point at
a compile happen and quickly
start to, to answer those
questions and begin breaking down
the problem. So first to
speak to surface area, aside
from Colonel 32, we'll get
into that in a moment.
But you know, the first
question is really whether or
not the method that you're
calling, even if it's a.net
method, does it exist in
mano? I mean, clearly we,
we lag because we follow
the implementation as they're released.
We, we don't generally try
to get too far out
ahead of the curve. So
we're missing things like, you
know, big parts of the.net
API. So you're not going
to have WCF or a
workflow or WPF. And, you
know, in.net three, five, we
were just wrapping up our
link to SQL implementation beyond
that the surface area doesn't
look so bad. We actually
have a pretty complete story.
If you're, you're doing asp.net
or SP that, and that
story's been complete for quite
awhile and asp.net Ajax is
ran quite well. Thank you
for that being MSPL the
same story with ASP net,
NBC. We, we supported that
on the day it was
released Really. So he didn't,
it just took a couple
of hours for you to
get MVC to work online.
Oh, well, so actually what
happened is, you know, for
a while we didn't know
what the license was. We
just sort of stayed away
from it. And then as
it got close to the
final release, the, the binaries
removed there had previously been
a restriction in the license
that said you can't run
these, these binaries off of
windows. And when that license
restriction was removed, we in
the lead up to the
final MVC release, we started
testing against the binaries. And
then, you know, luckily when
the final release happened and
it was MSPL, we were
ready to hit the ground
running. Cool. Now you, Scott,
how much time have you
spent with Manuel personally? Cause
when you're hosting them on
a space conference on open
space conference based on mono,
but how much time have
you spent with it? Have
you been using the Mo
the MoMA, analyzer and Monrovia
at all? I haven't been
using, I'm not really been
Too terribly. What's the word?
It's an X word, not
extend us, but I haven't
done a whole heck of
a lot with it yet.
I have monitor develop online
on my Mac book and
I've been working with it,
working on a website, built
on mono or helping a
friend with a website we've
done one mono. And, you
know, it's, it's, it's just
like working pretty much from
my perspective as a developer
or the experience is pretty
much just like everything else
I've done in.net buildings, web
forms, applications. So I don't
really sure that there's a
whole lot to say about
it beyond, you know, dot
net development, the reason I'm
hosting mono space, you know,
the reason why, you know,
I hosted the, the Y
hosted conferences for the last
two years, and this will
be the third year in
Austin. That for me, it's
a really great way to
concoct a circumstance where I
can be around people that
have things that I want
to learn. So Mona was
more for me, something that
I really understand the more,
I really want to understand
more of the possibilities running.net
on platforms that are not
only windows, one of those,
you know, it's a great
example with the iPhone. So
I'm hosting the conference, not
because I'm an expert, but
because I want to be,
I want to have some
time with some experts. Oh,
that's an interesting idea. So
I think this brings up
an interesting point as well,
and I'd be interested in
what both of you have
to think about this. So
people might say, people might
be listening to this and
they might say, wow, Scott,
just ask other Scott or
now other Scott, by the
way, Hanson, let's just ask
bellwether, tell me about your
expertise in, in mano. And,
and here you are saying,
well, you know, I'm not
much of an expert I'm
organizing this conference because I
want to talk to experts.
I think that's a really
interesting and interesting way to
talk about community because so
often we have this sense
of, and I mentioned this
before on a, on a
webcast that authorship equals authority.
And here you are a
proclaimed, not expert in mano,
but you have put together
a motto conference, and this
is kind of the new
generation of, of, of community.
Isn't it that you know,
why, why should you have
to be an expert? If
you're going to have an
open spaces conference, you want
to bring people in this,
isn't attempting where this isn't
a conference where bellwether talks
to us about mono, right?
You're you're in this case,
the catalyst, I am not,
I'm not teaching at this
conference. I'm not presenting at
this conference. I'll certainly do
certainly share any, any knowledge
that I have with people
with the open space, if
they want it, and if
it's appropriate, but this is
a conference from, from, I
mean, this is really selfish
from my perspective. I like
to spend some time sitting
at the seat of, and
being a student and learning
something that's just is way
outside of my current knowledge
set. And this is just
a way to do that.
And I think a lot
of people organizing regional conferences
in.net probably get the same,
the same kick out of
it. I can't imagine that
the guys organizing, you know,
the conference, I can't remember
the name of it. The
conference in Tennessee, that's becoming
quite popular. And the one
up in, in the great
Plains one, and that's the
great Plains to the great
lakes one. I mean, I'm
pretty sure those guys have
the same mentality where it's
just a great chance to
provide a space where you
can be near the people
who you want to be
your teachers. Yeah, definitely When
we shaped Cottonwood, you know,
because that's my goal. When
I shaped conferences like this,
I'm specifically creating a conference
that's structured for teaching and
learning and interaction with experts
rather than a conference that's
geared at a commercial more
commercial imperative. We don't really
have, obviously this will promote
mono and it'll promote some
of the Microsoft MSPL products
and he'll promote open source.
And the code flex guys
are coming down to talk
and engage the community, go
to open source. But really
this is about getting an
opportunity to be in a,
in a, in a conference
style that is completely built
from the ground up in
its DNA to be about
learning and teaching. Hey, everybody,
this is Scott coming at
you from another place in
time. No doubt. You probably
bump into testing tasks now,
and then, and your work
and, you know, writing functional
tests is probably not your
favorite thing. It's kind of
difficult. It takes time and
the results can be dubious.
Well, get ready to start
liking tests. Thanks to Tellerik
with the, the new whereby
testing framework building web automation
test is a breeze. You've
got code automation with advanced
asp.net, Ajax and server light
applications. You can write a
single test, have it executed
against multiple browsers at once.
You'd benefit from a rich
API there's link support integration
with visual studio unit testing,
also in unit X unit
and NBA unit, not to
mention the free rappers for
Telerik rad controls for ESPN
and Ajax, and several light,
all shipping with Telerik's new
testing tool. One of the
best features, the webinar testing
framework, which is developed by
art of test is it's
absolutely free. Freddie got hooked
on web testing framework, start
using it right away, go
to tellerik.com for more info.
Thanks a lot. Joseph, the,
the, the, the code Plex
foundation has started up here
and you guys are involved
or Miguel's involved at least
there's this relationship between Microsoft
and mano that I think
is great. And as a,
I mean, of course, but
I worked for Microsoft. So
you can't trust me where
they didn't say anything. I
suppose it seems like Novell
is and motto of getting
a lot of hassle from
the open source guys lately
you see on Miguel's blog,
he's getting a lot of
people just not being pleasant
about, about the relationship that
you guys have with Microsoft.
I, as a Microsoft guy
inside, I feel like we're
really trying to change things
and include a lot more
open source. What we're doing.
We're kind of, we're pushing
it every chance we can
to, to opensource things. What
does it feel like from
the other side of the,
of the evil partnership on
the Novell side? Well, you
know, from our perspective, I
really believe in what, what
Miguel says, which is, you
know, he's going to focus
on the possibilities. There's, you
know, it's, it's too much
of open sources and us
versus them mentality. And I
think the actions that Miguel
has consistently taken have been
where I can make people
more open and Microsoft in
particular that benefits everybody. And
that's, that's much better for
the community and users and
developers than, than trying to
draw a line in the
sand. So, you know, what's
interesting is, is Miguel has
taken a lot of flack
and I'm sure it's probably
taken its toll on him.
You know, there's a lot
of personal attacks, Right? Well,
people are saying, he's not
really a member of the
open source community cause he's
in bed with Microsoft. Yeah.
Certainly some people are, but
you know, what, what really
surprised me as I went
through and looked at, I
mean, he had a recent
blog posts that, you know,
sort of held out the,
the Palm, you know, for,
for peace there, a peace
offering, if you will. And
you know, the, the, there
was some, you know, there
were very limited attacks actually.
I think coming back at
him versus, you know, a
lot of people that said,
wow, I really, I really
get what you're doing. And,
and I think it's great
that, that Microsoft clearly becoming
more open. And I think
Miguel deserves a lot of
credit for it. So from
our perspective, and of course,
particularly with my background, I
mean, I was a.net developer
for, I joined Nobel. I
I've always believed that this
potential life there and, you
know, there's potential and Microsoft
is a great, great software
company and there's potential and,
and, you know, the.net framework
being available to all developers.
And, you know, this is,
this is definitely furthering, you
know, some good goals. Do
you think that this is
competition? I mean, is model
just flat out competition or
is it filling? Go ahead.
Yeah. I mean, I'm sure
I I'm sure there's, there's,
it's it's yeah. I mean,
clearly there's a lot of
competition. We would, we would,
we would love to, you
know, to, to win over
some dotnet developers, but, you
know, it's, I guess it's
about finding where, you know,
we have mutual mutual interests
and, you know, growing the
pie, as they say, there's
a, you know, when we
make the platform better, we
both. And do you think
that's the case? Scott personally,
I've Always been, you know,
aggravated I think a little
bit by a number of,
of folks in Microsoft, certainly
not everybody who sort of
subconsciously or pre consciously feel
that the word competition is
necessarily a negative. And I
did as very much a
neutral force. It can either
be, they can either lead
to, you know, bad outcomes
or good outcomes. And, and
I tend to see competition
naturally as something that's really
great because it gets people,
it blows up the dust
out of a pipe, it
gets the letter G out
of the way. It gets
people thinking and it gets
companies innovating and it gets
productivity improved. And, and, and
it has, it makes our,
you know, it makes us
call it the question are
our firmest beliefs and come
up with the next generation
of beliefs. So, yeah, I
think it's absolutely competitive, but
I am one of, I,
I, my definition of, or
of, of competition is, is
a hundred percent positive. I
mean, it's just kind of
like saying, yeah, it increases
profit or it increases opportunity.
It's productivity and competition go
hand in hand. So it's
just a given it's just,
of course. So clearly in
your mind though, the world
would be a lesser place
without, without the mano option,
A lesser place without diversity
of any conflict. Well, you
should put that on a
tee shirt. It's got, that
was beautiful. Did you just
come up with that? No,
but you know, I'm, You
said a little bit here,
just a tear just right
down my face. I'm a
firm believer in the value
of diversity and I, and
I believe in diversity because
every time I come face
to face with diversity in
my life, it it's, it's,
it's very challenging and it's
often painful. And I know
when I come, you know,
face to face with those
experiences, that, you know, that
experience is showing me at
a place in my life
where it's time to stretch
out and grow. And, and,
and that's part of what
competition does. It does increase
the diversity and through diversity,
we both broaden and deeper
our ability, Well, speaking of
competition, and, and as, as
if it wasn't confusing enough
for the average Joe out
there, really, if you're coding
C-sharp or VB, you're in
a good, you're in a
good position right now, cause
you can create a whole
diverse series of applications. Joseph,
can you talk a little
bit about, about mano touch
and what that means to
the average windows C-sharp and
VB developer out there? Oh,
of course. I'd love to
talk about mono touch. This
has been really dominating a
lot of my life for,
for the past several months
and then particularly, you know,
in the past two weeks
since we launched them on
no touch product. So, so
mono touch is, you know,
for those who don't know,
it's a model for the
iPhone and, you know, that's,
I think, you know, I
hate to use a cliche,
but I mean, it's sort
of game changing, you know,
there's iPhone itself being referenced
is that quite the iPhone
development platform prior to mano
touch was essentially X code
and objective C and yeah,
with mano touch, what we
did is we've, we've opened
up the platform to the.net
developers. And of course this
is attractive to people who
are really attached to C-sharp
and you know, they want
to use those skills to
develop iPhone apps, but it's
even been very attractive to
do people who've already bit
the bullet and learn objective
C just because, you know,
C sharp and motto offer
some advantages, you know, over
the, over the current tool
set that's available. So apparently
it's, it's reasonably easy to
make an iPhone application, even
though you're using objective C
because there's a whole, I
mean, there's an app for
that, whatever there is, there's
an app for that. What,
what is the benefit of,
of, of me writing the
application and a d.net.net platform?
Well, there's a few, I
mean, one is the, I
mean, of course it's a.net
is, is comfortable for many
people. But I mean, like
I said, if you, if
you already have bit the
objective C bullet it's, it's
really, are you comfortable with,
with the syntax and, you
know, we, we bring, we
bring C-sharp three to the
iPhone. So, you know, when
I say the syntax, I
mean, you know, you get
link, we have linked XML,
you know, several examples published
on the site already and
you know, everything else below
that, that, that depends on.
So, you know, you get
your Lambdas and your generics,
et cetera. We also have
garbage collection. You don't have
that in objective C on
the iPhone. Wow. And now
I understand though, that there's
not, you don't have the
ability to do what we
call jitting just-in-time compilation on
an iPhone. That's something that
is, it's not that it's
technically impossible, but it's explicitly
called out that you can't
do kind of co-generation and
just-in-time interpretation on an iPhone.
So how did you get
around that since, since dotnet
bytecode works the way that
it does. Right? So it's,
I mean, it's, it is
a license restriction. It's also
a technical restriction. The Colonel
enforces this. Yeah. So, I
mean, I guess what it
comes down to is that,
you know, you can generate
code, but you can't execute
it cause you can't change.
You know, you're not allowed
to change the, the memory
that you write to, to
be executable. So this limits
a lot of languages and
virtual machines from, from being
able to be, you know,
put on the iPhone, the
way we get around it
is mano has a feature
which is full ahead of
time compilation. This would be
similar to engine in dotnet
except engine isn't, isn't really
full ahead of time compilation.
But in the case of
mono, we can actually take
a dotnet executable and piled
the whole thing down to
a native executable. And so
that just means that, you
know, basically every path that
could be jetted, we didn't
advance none. There's a couple
of a couple of features
that means you're not gonna
have access to such as
reflection of mint clearly or
anything that depends on that,
but you still get a
pretty, pretty, a complete set
of dotnet functionality without that.
So what underlying library are
you talking to? I mean,
this isn't wind farms, right?
I mean, that would be,
that would be weird. It's
cocoa. And so let me
just tell you, I, maybe
I should just take a
step back and talk a
little bit about what the
development experience is actually like.
Yeah. Let's, let's do that
because we understand that let's
just back up for a
second, kind of like have
a reset in sense of
the whole, the whole talk.
So mano itself is an
open source implementation of the
CLI that allows you to
take, we're going to write
C sharp and the code
that you know, how to
write now in the libraries,
you know how to write
now and it'll work on
non windows systems. Mano vs
is the name we're using
for the add in that
plugs into visual studio and
makes it really easy for
you to do this in
the environment you're comfortable with
monospace as the conference that
Scott's holding in October. And
now we're talking about mano
touch, which is the ability
to compile dotnet applications, targeting
the iPhone. And then maybe
you can explain that we're
not necessarily doing this in
visual studio, right? Interjection here.
We, you know, we're, we're
often talking about C-sharp because
that's where we default, but
it, I think it's important
to note too, that vb.net
is in play here as
well. And from what I
understand, people have got iron
Python and iron Ruby running
on, on the mono implementation
of the, of the runtime
as well. Thank you for
keeping me, keeping me honest.
You're absolutely right. But to
take all that back into
the context of what I
think you were asking with
mano touch is, well, Manuel
touches an SDK and it
runs on a Mac. So
that's probably the place to
start. So, you know, with,
with mano touch, we've included
all the tools. And I
mean, if you wanted to
do, you know, I phone
development, you know, with, with
visual studio in the command
line, you know, your, your
experience would be, you know,
fire up visual studio, maybe
in parallels or whatever, and,
and write you some C
sharp and then compile it
and then switch over to
your Mac and, and, and
use, you know, the tools
that we provide there. But
that's really not the best
development experience. And it's not
really what we, what we
designed the experience to be.
So really what, what most
people are gonna see and
experience when they work with,
with mano touches, firing up
mano develop on the Mac.
And since Scott mentioned that
I probably should interject that,
you know, model developed is
really, it supports multiple languages,
but it really works best
at C sharp. So I,
you know, while you can
do VB, you know, if
you have, if, if you,
you know, if you have
a real need to do
that, your best story is
going to be C sharp.
Okay. So you're saying C-sharp
is really kind of first
among equals in a sense.
Yeah. Correct. So C sharp
supported really well in mana
development and the visual studio
developer opening up mano develop
would be very comfortable with,
with the experience you're going
to, you know, you're going
to have your IntelliSense and
project structure very similar to
what you're used to. In
fact, mano developed supports the
same solution in project file
format as visual studio. So
you could even share code
in that manner. But the
experience for, for the iPhone
development is that we actually
integrate to Apple's X code,
where it makes sense because
there's a lot of functionality
that we depend on there.
I see. So you're not
trying to necessarily rewrite everything
that already works. Correct. So,
so your question was, you
know, what is the UI
and this isn't WinForms on
an iPhone clearly, that would
be ugly. So what we
actually do is we support
the, the interface builder that
Apple ships with the iPhone
SDK and interface builder is,
you know, as a designer,
you would, you would be
comfortable with that experience. You
have a, you know, a
toolbox and you trapped controls
onto a form that is
at the aspect ratio of
an iPhone. So it looks,
you know, it looks like
you're, you're designing on an
iPhone screen. And at the
end of that process, you
know, you have what you
want your UI to look
like. And those are several
controls that, well, the way
we access them in, in
mano developed is that you
name outlets, which is the,
the term from there, you
know, from, from their designer
world. But basically you would
go through name outlets to
correspond to all of the
controls that you want to
have access to. And then
you save your, your designer
file and you go back
to mono develop and it
will they'll wanna develop the
text. You know, it detects
all the interfaces that you
have created from within model
develop. It's kind of hard
to describe, But it kind
of reminds me of model,
view controller type of a
structure or what we used
to call document view back
in the day. But the
idea that you, you create
your resources in one place,
you prepare all of your
user interface stuff, and then
you go and you do
all of your logic and
then you hook them up
to each other. Right? So,
but I think the part
that I felt to described
is that it's all still
very integrated in a monitor
developed. So from within monitored,
obviously I want to add
a new interface and it
adds the zip file for
you. And then you double
click on that and you're
going to be pretty comfortable
transitioning over to a designer
that's running, you know, outside
of the model developer experience,
but still in it. And
when you save your files,
we automatically generate all of
the, you know, the partial
classes like you would get
with any other designer, kind
of a model, you know,
that we're all comfortable with
from asp.net or WinForms designing.
So, you know, so back
in mono develop, you now
have everything bound up nicely
for you. And all of
your controls exposed is.net controls.
And, and you know, all
the properties exposed within there
that you're going to have
access to change. And from
there, it's, it's a pretty
straightforward development process. You could,
if you wanted to, you
could avoid the interface builder,
just like you might avoid
it and wind forms. If
you wanted to build all
your interfaces out from, from
C-sharp, you would be able
to do that. So, and
then the next step is,
of course you build it
and, and then you run
it. And, you know, like
if you get our evaluation
version today, it, it supports
all of this that we've
discussed so far and all
this integration all the way
back to the iPhone simulator,
that Apple ships in the
SDK as well. So as
soon as you hit run
inside of inside model develop,
it's going to fire up
the simulator and launch your
application for you, and you
can interact with it, you
know, right there on the
screen. And is there anything
that you can't do? I
mean, this isn't like a
technology prototype, is it, it's
not like a, like a,
Oh, look at this kind
of thing. It's like somebody
used to say, it's like
a William. Sometimes people put
together a prototype, it's like
a three legged dog. You
know, you, you know, he's
going to get where he's
going, but it's just hard
to watch. Is this a
toy or is this really,
can you really write an
application? And C-sharp on an
iPhone that looks like one,
Yeah, this is the product.
So it's a little different
than, you know, maybe some
of the approaches that, that,
you know, some of the
cool things we've done with
mano in the past, but
no, it's, I mean, the
entire experience is very streamlined.
And when, like I said,
I just described it in
the evaluation version. You could
develop, you know, you can
go get that for free.
It doesn't, you know, it
doesn't time expire or anything.
And you could develop your
application against the simulator. What
the evaluation version doesn't support
is actually deploying to the
device. You know, that's, that's
the product we sell. So,
but it supports all of
that in the end and
you pay him, you're paying
for it, so you should
expect it to You're paying
for it. So, I mean,
it's, well, I mean, that's,
that's, that's kind of interesting.
I didn't mean to actually
do that, but it sounds
like I kind of stepped
in the, I think I
made an indirect comparison against
open source software that like,
Hey, if it works great,
if it doesn't work, sorry,
you know, go figure it
out for it. And you
actually emphasize that when you
say, well, this is a
product. I don't know if
I'm, I didn't mean to
do that, but it almost
sounds like we're saying, well,
this is a product. So
you really can expect it
to work really well. Both
motto and motto touch are,
are things that are in
production. Real people are doing
real work on these things
today, right? I mean, there
are apps I can get
with touch that are in
the app store. You know,
I don't, I don't know
if there are mano touch
ones on the app store
today because of the length
of time for the approval
process. And we just launched
one on touch, like I
said, two weeks ago. And,
you know, we had the
beta program only running a
short time before that, because
this was actually all a
very aggressive production. So within
the beta program, we didn't,
we didn't give out the,
you know, we give out
the license to, to build
apps for, you know, a
go live license like you
would be familiar with. So
we, we don't have that,
but it's probably worth pointing
out a little bit of
the history of how, how
mano touch came to be,
which is that we license
mano to various companies for
various purposes when they need
to, to have a commercial
license of mano, rather than,
you know, just what's provided
by the open source licenses.
And in one particular case,
a game company called unity,
licensed mano for use in
their game engine, which they
have for windows, Mac, the
Nintendo wi and ultimately the
iPhone. Correct. Yeah. We actually
offer motto on the way.
So if there's any, you
know, any way developers out
there, you know, give us
a call. We can, you
know, I can't put the
wheat port of Manoa. Wow.
So Scott, we need to
have a, we need to
have a motto on the,
we talk at models at
Bano space, get on that.
Are you going to, are
you going to do, it
sounds like I'm going to
have to, since it's an
open space conference, it would
be interesting to talk about,
you know, whether or not
we should have some people
have actually talked about doing
game development session. Yeah, definitely.
There's a lot of interesting
games with mano before we
go off on that tangent.
And that might even be
the place to go, you
know, let me go ahead.
And, and me get to
the point of the unity
story, which is that unity
license model for use on
the iPhone about a year
ago. And so they have
a few hundred apps in
the app store that have
model in it already. So
you know why we don't
have the mono touch apps
out there. There's plenty of
them using motto and using
the technology. And in fact,
I actually saw an announcement
yesterday that I think five
of the top 100 apps
on the app store were
produced with unity. Wow. Well,
this is the thing though,
if you're doing it right,
you're not supposed to know.
Right. I mean, this has
always been the thing whenever
I use an application and
discover that it's running.net and
I never even thought about
it until I kind of
stumbled upon it, you know,
using some introspective developer tool.
I always realized that, no,
okay, good. This is, this
is success. You know, whether
the applications written in, in,
in tickle or whether it's
written in mano or whether
it's written in Delphi, it
doesn't matter. As long as
it's a great app. People
don't care. I think it's
just the developer in us
that wants to go into
the app store search for
the word mono and they
get the list of all
of the different applications. Yeah.
I think you're completely correct.
And yeah, I mean, our
goal in particularly with mano
attach is we want an
app that looks like it
belongs on the iPhone. And
that's why we made a
lot of the decisions we
made. I mean, originally when,
when we announced mean, when
we started talking about unity,
I, I started getting tons
of emails every week that
were, how do I get,
you know, how do I
get motto on the iPhone?
And the answer was, well,
you know, unless you're producing
a game engine, we don't
really have a useful port
for you. You can go
get unity and you can
make an app that looks
like a game, but there's
really no story for how
do you make an app
that looks like an iPhone
now. And, and with mano
touch, I mean, that's what
we did. We bound all
the native APIs or like
significant portion of them. And,
and that's why you use
their interface builder. So at
the end of the day,
yeah, it should use or
shouldn't know. Very cool. Very
cool. Well, Joseph and Scott,
thanks a lot for giving
us kind of an overview
of the, of the mono
ecosystem. It tells us a
lot of interesting stuff. We
didn't even get a chance
to talk about Moonlight, the,
the mano, a mano and
Silverlight people can learn all
about that. It does it
go hyphen mano.com, Correct? Yeah.
That's probably the shortest URL.
They can get Moonlight Moonlight.
Very cool. And then they
can learn about monospace at
monospace dot U S. This
has been another episode of
Hansel minutes, and I'll see
you again next week.